---
title: "Where is the Line Between Evolution and Exploitation? Generative AI and the Postcolonial Software Landscape in the Global South"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/gaii
excerpt: 'This study examines the impact of Generative AI tools on Bangladesh's software industry through the lenses of data-colonialism and postcolonial computing, revealing how company maturity, data security concerns, and policy awareness shape AI adoption differently in the Global South compared to the West. It highlights insights from software practitioners on AI tools' effects on key development activities and the evolving job landscape.'
date: 2009-10-01
venue: 'The ACM (Association of Computing Machinery) CHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems'
# slidesurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/slides1.pdf'
# paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/paper1.pdf'
# citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---

This paper explores the impact of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) tools in the software industry of Bangladesh through the lenses of data-colonialism and postcolonial computing. While the West has extensively explored various dimensions of these tools, their effects on the Global South remain largely underexplored. Based on our ethnography-inspired qualitative study with software practitioners in Bangladesh, this paper highlights the impact of popular GAI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot, Claude, CodeWhisperer) on the software industry in the Global South. We investigate the impact of GAI tools on four fundamental software process activities: specification, development, validation, and evolution; assess local practitioners' perceptions of future adoption of these tools, and examine the evolving job landscape. Our findings reveal how company maturity influences AI tool adoption and how concerns such as data security, investment readiness for in-house AI solutions, stakeholder protection, and policy awareness may differ between the West and the Global South.This paper explores the impact of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) tools in the software industry of Bangladesh through the lenses of data-colonialism and postcolonial computing. While the West has extensively explored various dimensions of these tools, their effects on the Global South remain largely underexplored. Based on our ethnography-inspired qualitative study with software practitioners in Bangladesh, this paper highlights the impact of popular GAI tools (e.g., ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot, Claude, CodeWhisperer) on the software industry in the Global South. We investigate the impact of GAI tools on four fundamental software process activities: specification, development, validation, and evolution; assess local practitioners' perceptions of future adoption of these tools, and examine the evolving job landscape. Our findings reveal how company maturity influences AI tool adoption and how concerns such as data security, investment readiness for in-house AI solutions, stakeholder protection, and policy awareness may differ between the West and the Global South.